New new react tutorial (#6842)
microsoft/FluidFramework: docs/content/docs/start/react-tutorial.md

---

> title: 'Tutorial: Create a Fluid Framework application with React'

Reviewer: We're going to use this for our react "recipe", so move this page to docs/content/docs/recipes/react.md

Reviewer: Actually, I prefer this after looking at the staging site. Leave this and I'll follow up on what to do with recipes.

menuPosition: 4
---

In this tutorial, you'll learn about using the Fluid Framework by building a simple application that enables every client of the application to change a dynamic time stamp on itself and all other clients almost instantly. You'll also learn how to connect the Fluid data layer with a view layer made in [React](https://reactjs.org/). The following image shows the time stamp application open in four browsers. Each has a button labelled **click** and beside it a UNIX Epoch time. The same time in all four. The cursor is on the button in one browser.

> ![Four browsers with the Timestamp app open in them.](images/Four-clients-1.PNG)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Four browsers with the Timestamp app open in them.](https://fluidframework.blob.core.windows.net/static/images/Four-clients-1.PNG)
```

The following image shows the same four clients one second after the **click** button was pressed. Note that the timestamp has updated to the very same time in all four browsers.

> 

Reviewer 2: nit: extra space? 

```suggestion
```

> ![Four browsers with the Timestamp app open in them one second after the button has been pushed.](images/Four-clients-2.PNG)

Reviewer: For the images, I'll upload them to a CDN manually and we can use the absolute URLs here. We're trying to avoid committing binaries.

Author: > For the images, I'll upload them to a CDN manually and we can use the absolute URLs here. We're trying to avoid committing binaries.

OK. Can I leave the image references "as is" and leave it to you to fix them later?

Reviewer: Yeah, that's fine. Where are the images themselves though? I don't see them in the PR.

Author: Strange. I added an images folder to FluidFramework\docs\content\docs\start, but my git client doesn't see it. They don't show up when I run git status. I'll email them to you while I try to figure this out.

> ![Four browsers with the Timestamp app open in them one second after the button has been pushed.](images/Four-clients-2.PNG)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Four browsers with the Timestamp app open in them one second after the button has been pushed.](https://fluidframework.blob.core.windows.net/static/images/Four-clients-2.PNG)
```

> {{< callout note >}}
> 
> This tutorial assumes that you are familiar with the [Fluid Framework Overview](../overview.md) and that you have completed the [QuickStart](./quick-start.md). You should also be familiar with the basics of [React](https://reactjs.org/), [creating React projects](https://reactjs.org/docs/create-a-new-react-app.html#create-react-app), and [React Hooks](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-intro.html).
> 
> {{< /callout >}}

Reviewer 2: @tylerbutler , to confirm the proper syntax here. I think it's this: 

```suggestion
{{% callout note %}}

This tutorial assumes that you are familiar with the [Fluid Framework Overview](../overview.md) and that you have completed the [QuickStart](./quick-start.md). You should also be familiar with the basics of [React](https://reactjs.org/), [creating React projects](https://reactjs.org/docs/create-a-new-react-app.html#create-react-app), and [React Hooks](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-intro.html).

{{% /callout %}}
```

Reviewer: Both work in most cases.

    ```dotnetcli
    npx create-react-app fluid-react-tutorial --use-npm
    ```

1. The project is created in a subfolder named `fluid-react-tutorial`. Navigate to it with the command `cd fluid-react-tutorial`.
1. The project uses two Fluid libraries:

    |Library |Description |
    |---|---|

>     |fluid&#x2011;experimental/fluid&#x2011;framework |Contains the SharedMap [DataObject](https://fluidframework.com/docs/glossary/#dataobject) that synchronizes data across clients. _This object will hold the most recent timestamp update made by any client._|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    |fluid&#x2011;experimental/fluid&#x2011;framework |Contains the SharedMap [distributed data structure]({{< relref "dds.md" >}}) that synchronizes data across clients. _This object will hold the most recent timestamp update made by any client._|
```
The relref is a feature of our docs tool, Hugo. More here: <https://gohugo.io/content-management/shortcodes/#ref-and-relref>

Totally optional to use them but they're handy.

>     |fluid&#x2011;experimental/fluid&#x2011;framework |Contains the SharedMap [DataObject](https://fluidframework.com/docs/glossary/#dataobject) that synchronizes data across clients. _This object will hold the most recent timestamp update made by any client._|

Reviewer: Are the HTML-encoded characters intentional?

Author: Yes. If we use an ordinary hyphen, the column breaks on the hyphen and it looks funny.

>     |fluid&#x2011;experimental/frs&#x2011;client&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;   |Defines the connection to a Fluid Relay Service (FRS) server and defines the starting schema for the [container](https://fluidframework.com/docs/concepts/containers-runtime/). In this tutorial, the FRS server will run on localhost.|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    |fluid&#x2011;experimental/frs&#x2011;client&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;   |Defines the connection to an Azure Fluid Relay service (FRS) server and defines the starting schema for the [Fluid container][]. In this tutorial, we will use a local test server called Tinylicious.|
```

Author: I'm going to make you proposed change, but leave out "Azure". Since the code is using frs-client to connect to tinylicious, it is not always used to connect to an **Azure** FRS.

    |Library |Description |
    |---|---|
    |fluid&#x2011;experimental/fluid&#x2011;framework&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;    |Contains the SharedMap [distributed data structure]({{< relref "dds.md" >}}) that synchronizes data across clients. _This object will hold the most recent timestamp update made by any client._|

>     |fluid&#x2011;experimental/frs&#x2011;client&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;   |Defines the connection to a Fluid service server and defines the starting schema for the [Fluid container][]. In this tutorial, we will use a local test service called Tinylicious.|

Reviewer 2: @tylerbutler , we need to land on how we are thinking of tinylicious and frs.

    npm install @fluid-experimental/frs-client @fluid-experimental/fluid-framework
    ```

## Code the project

1. Open the file `\src\App.js` in your code editor. Delete all the default `import` statements except the one that imports `App.css`. Then delete all the markup from the `return` statement. The file should look like the following:

    ```js
    import './App.css';
    
    function App() {
      return (
  
      );
    }
    
    export default App;
    ```

1. Add the following `import` statements:

    ```js
    import React from "react";
    import { FrsClient, InsecureTokenProvider } from "@fluid-experimental/frs-client";;
    import { SharedMap } from "@fluid-experimental/fluid-framework";
    ```

### Create a container ID helper function

Add the following helper function to the file below the `import` statements. Note the following about this code:

> - Every [container](https://fluidframework.com/docs/glossary/#container) must have a unique ID. For the ID, this application will use a truncated version of the UNIX epoch time when the container is first created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Every [Fluid container][] must have a unique ID. For the ID, this application will use a truncated version of the UNIX epoch time when the container is first created.
```

- The ID is stored in the `window.location.hash` property.
- The function is called in a useEffect hook that you create in a later step, so it is called every time the application (re)renders.

```js
const getContainerId = () => {
    let isNew = false;
    if (window.location.hash.length === 0) {
        isNew = true;
        window.location.hash = Date.now().toString();
    }
    const containerId = window.location.hash.substring(1);
    return { containerId, isNew };
};
```

### Configure the FRS client

> Add the following constant below the helper function. This object configures the FRS client to connect with an FRS server that runs on localhost. Note that in a production application, you would use a real Secure Token Service to protect access to the FRS server, but during development you can use the dummy service `InsecureTokenProvider`.

Reviewer: I don't know if "Secure Token Service" is a proper noun in this context or not.

Author: ```suggestion
Add the following constant below the helper function. This object configures the FRS client to connect with an FRS server that runs on localhost. Note that in a production application, you would use a real security token service to protect access to the FRS server, but during development you can use the dummy service `InsecureTokenProvider`.
```

```js
const frsClientConfig = {
    tenantId: "local",
    tokenProvider: new InsecureTokenProvider("anyValue", { id: "userId" }),
    orderer: "http://localhost:7070",
    storage: "http://localhost:7070",
};
```

### Move Fluid data to the view

> 1. The FRS will bring changes made to the timestamp from any client to the current client. But Fluid is agnostic about the UI framework. We need a helper method to get the Fluid data, from the SharedMap object, into the view layer (the React state). Add the following code below the FrsClient configuration constant. This method is called when the application loads the first time, and the value that is returned form it is assigned to a React state property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The FRS will bring changes made to the timestamp from any client to the current client. But Fluid is agnostic about the UI framework. You can use a helper method to get the Fluid data, from the SharedMap object, into the view layer (the React state). Add the following code below the FrsClient configuration constant. This method is called when the application loads the first time, and the value that is returned form it is assigned to a React state property.
```

Below the `useEffect` hook, replace the `return ();` line with the following code. Note about this code:

- If the `localTimestamp` state has not been initialized, a blank screen is rendered.
- The `sharedTimestamp.set` method sets the _key_ of the `fluidSharedMap` object to "time" and the _value_ to the current UNIX epoch time. This triggers the `valueChanged` event on the object, so the `updateLocalTimestamp` function runs and sets the `localTimestamp` state to the same object; for example, `{time: "1615996266675"}`. The `App` component rerenders and the `<span>` is updated with the latest timestamp.
- All other clients update too because the Fluid server propagates the change to the `fluidSharedMap` on all of them and this `valueChanged` event updates the `localTimestamp` state on all of them.

```js
if (localTimestamp) {
    return (
        <div className="App">
            <button onClick={() => fluidSharedMap.sharedTimestamp.set("time", Date.now().toString())}>
                Get Time
            </button>
            <span>{localTimestamp.time}</span>
        </div>
    )
} else {
     return <div/>;
}
```

## Start the Fluid server and run the application

> In the Command Prompt, run the following command to start the FRS server. Note that `tinylicious` is the name of the FRS that runs on localhost.

Reviewer: This isn't quite correct with respect to Tinylicious. Tinylicious and FRS are separate, but the `FrsClient` can talk to either Tinylicious or FRS. When testing locally, you can configure FrsClient to talk to Tinylicious, and you run Tinylicious separately as described here. [This info](https://github.com/microsoft/FluidHelloWorld#accessing-fluid-data) might be helpful too. I'm working on getting that stuff into these docs.

Author: Hmmm. The info you linked to says "FrsClient supports deployed Azure Fluid Relay service instances for production purposes, as well as a local, in-memory service instance, called Tinylicious, for development purposes." It seems to me that the "local in-memory service" should be called **a** Fluid Relay service. It's just confusing to have a object called FrsClient that sometimes connects to a thing called FRS and sometimes connects to a different thing that's NOT called FRS (Tinylicious).  If we don't want to call Tinylicious **an** FRS, then it would be better to go back to "TinyliciousClient" instead of "FrsClient".

Reviewer: > It seems to me that the "local in-memory service" should be called **a** Fluid Relay service.

You should think of FRS as a brand name. The generic thing is a "Fluid service." Tinylicious is a Fluid service, in the same sense that FRS and Routerlicious are Fluid services.

We could indeed force the developer to use the TinyliciousClient whenever they're doing local development (which will always be against Tinylicious). That was the original plan, but we moved away from it because it's an unnecessary step. We can today trivially support both Tinylicious locally and FRS remotely in the same client though this may not be true forever if FRS and Tinylicious diverge (no plans there to be clear).

Fast-forwarding to when there are other non-Microsoft Fluid services, then their clients may behave differently, and it's not required that a service client support both local and remote development. In fact, another Fluid service may choose not to use Tinylicious at all, and instead provide their developers with another solution for local development (a docker image of their production service for example).

Author: @tylerbutler OK. I'll adjust the wording accordingly, so Tinylicious is described as a Fluid service, not a Fluid Relay service. But since FRS is a brand name, and the generic term is "Fluid service", I strongly recommend that we change the type FrsClient to FsClient. It is confusing to have a type whose name implies that it works only with the brand FRS when it actually can work with a non-FRS Fluid service.

Reviewer: > I strongly recommend that we change the type FrsClient to FsClient. It is confusing to have a type whose name implies that it works only with the brand FRS when it actually can work with a non-FRS Fluid service.

We are planning to change the name, but it will still be the Azure-specific client. Would this be less confusing if the local server was called Local Azure Fluid Relay service instead of Tinylicious?

Author: > We are planning to change the name, but it will still be the Azure-specific client. Would this be less confusing if the local server was called Local Azure Fluid Relay service instead of Tinylicious?

Yes! "Tinylicious" and "Routerlicious" are not self-documenting. (But maybe just "Local Fluid Relay service" because it's not really Azure if it's local.

Reviewer: This gets tricky, because there isn't just _one_ local Fluid service, and there will possibly be more in the future depending on how other folks set up their Fluid service offerings. The services we have differ on a variety of axes, so we don't typically refer to things generically, "this is the local test server" because that's not precise enough on our side. That's why we call the servers by proper names.

But this need not bleed out into the general developer story. We could either rename tinylicious, export it in another package (e.g. @fluidframework/local-service), or figure something else out. @skylerjokiel @danielroney FYI - any thoughts on this?

```dotnetcli
npx tinylicious
```

Open a new Command Prompt and navigate to the root of the project; for example, `C:/My Fluid Projects/fluid-react-tutorial`. Start the application server with the following command. The application opens in your browser. This may take a few minutes.

```dotnetcli
npm run start
```

{{< callout note >}}

If you are prompted to run the application server on another port, press Enter to accept.

> {{< /callout >}}

Reviewer: I think this will cause problems later if it happens, because the app assumes the default port.

Author: ```suggestion
```
